QuicTransport origin trial post (#3104)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/quictransport/index.md

---
title: Experimenting with QuicTransport
subhead: QuicTransport is a new API offering low-latency, bi-directional, client-server messaging. Learn more about its use cases, and how to give feedback about the future of the implementation.
authors:
  - jeffposnick
description: QuicTransport is a new API offering low-latency, bi-directional, client-server messaging. Learn more about its use cases, and how to give feedback about the future of the implementation.
date: 2020-06-03
updated: 2020-06-07
hero: hero.jpg
hero_position: center
alt: |
  Photo of fast-moving traffic.
origin_trial:
  url: https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-6744140441987317759
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - network
---

## Background

### What's QuicTransport?

> [QuicTransport](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#quic-transport) is a web API that uses the [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) protocol in a bidirectional, non-HTTP transport. It's intended for two-way communications between a web client and a QUIC server. It supports sending data both unreliably via its [datagram APIs](#datagram), and reliably via its [streams APIs](#stream).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[QuicTransport](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#quic-transport) is a web API that uses the [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) protocol in a bi-directional, non-HTTP transport. It's intended for two-way communications between a web client and a QUIC server. It supports sending data both unreliably via its [datagram APIs](#datagram), and reliably via its [streams APIs](#stream).
```
Adds a hypen to `bi-directional` because that's how you formatted it in the front matter

Author: I am going to change the front matter in that case. The [specification](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#bidirectional-streams-transport ) uses "bidirectional" throughout, and there are API names that also use Bidirectional, so unless there's a strong web.dev editorial decision, I'll stick with no hyphen for everything.

The QuicTransport API was designed with the web developer use cases in mind, and should feel more like writing modern web platform code than using WebRTC's data channel interfaces. [Unlike WebRTC](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=302019), QuicTransport is supported inside of [Web Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers), which allows you to perform client-server communications independent of a given HTML page. Because QuicTransport exposes a [Streams](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/)-compliant interface, it supports optimizations around [backpressure](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/#backpressure).

However, if you already have a working WebRTC client/server setup that you're happy with, switching to QuicTransport may not offer many advantages.

## Try it out

> The best way to experiment with QuicTransport is to use [this Python code](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/samples/blob/gh-pages/quictransport/quic_transport_server.py) to start up a compatible QUIC server locally. You can then use this page with a [basic JavaScript client](https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/quictransport/client.html) to try out client/server communications.

Reviewer: Optional: Upload the JS client to Glitch? It's much nicer to be able to browse the code directly from this page. It also reduces the odds that people navigate away from your article and never return.

https://web.dev/handbook/web-dev-components/#glitches

Author: The client isn't actually functional without also running a local Python server which uses the QUIC protocol, and that's not support on Glitch. Keeping the sample code and instructions on running it on GoogleChrome/samples seemed like the right call.

## Using the API

QuicTransport was designed on top of modern web platform primitives, like the [Streams API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API). It relies heavily on [promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises), and works well with [<code>async</code> and <code>await</code>](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Async_await).

> The QuicTransport [origin trial](#register-for-ot) supports three distinct types of traffic: datagrams, as well as both unidirectional and bidirectional streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The QuicTransport [origin trial](#register-for-ot) supports three distinct types of traffic: datagrams, as well as both uni-directional and bi-directional streams.
```
Please do a find & replace throughout the rest of the article to make sure you're using `uni-directional` and `bi-directional` consistently

Author: Changed the front matter instead.

---
title: Experimenting with QuicTransport
subhead: QuicTransport is a new API offering low-latency, bi-directional, client-server messaging. Learn more about its use cases, and how to give feedback about the future of the implementation.
authors:
  - jeffposnick
description: QuicTransport is a new API offering low-latency, bi-directional, client-server messaging. Learn more about its use cases, and how to give feedback about the future of the implementation.
date: 2020-06-03
updated: 2020-06-03
hero: hero.jpg
hero_position: center
alt: |

>   Blurry picture of traffic. Photo by Robin Pierre on Unsplash

Reviewer 2: @kaycebasques Have we started adding photo credits to the hero's alt tag? It's not a bad idea if we haven't. We should be discuss this and be consistent.

Reviewer: I don't think that's an appropriate use of the `alt` attribute. The attribute should describe the contents of the image for someone who can't see it. The photographer and online location of the image is metadata. cc @robdodson to confirm.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I would be inclined to lean toward Kayce's suggestion, especially if we include the metadata elsewhere, such as at the bottom of the article.

I think the rule of thumb with alt text is that shorter is generally better. So if there's something that we can omit, especially on a mostly presentational image, then we may want to do so to improve the efficiency of the user experience.

Author: FWIW, I copied https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/master/src/site/content/en/blog/wakelock/index.md as a starting point for this post, and followed that example for the `alt` metadata. Happy to change it.

origin_trial:
  url: https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-6744140441987317759
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - quic
  - networking
  - udp
  - webtransport

>   - behind-a-flag

Reviewer 3: wanted to mention that I think some of these tags aren't in postTags.js and thus won't show up on the site.

Author: Ah, okay. I'll prune.

---

## Background

### What's QuicTransport?

[QuicTransport](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#quic-transport) is a web API that uses the [QUIC](https://www.chromium.org/quic) protocol in a bidirectional, non-HTTP transport. It's intended for two-way communications between a web client and a QUIC server. It supports sending data both unreliably via its [datagram APIs](#datagram), and reliably via its [streams APIs](#stream).

> [Datagrams](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-datagram-00) are ideal for sending and receiving data that do not need strong delivery guarantees. Individual packets of data are limited in size by the [maximum transmission unit (MTU)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_transmission_unit) of the underlying connection, and may or may not be transmitted successfully, and if they are transferred, they may arrive in an arbitrary order. These characteristics make the datagram APIs ideal for low-latency, best-effort data transmission. You can think of datagrams as [user datagram protocol (UDP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_Datagram_Protocol), but encrypted and congestion-controlled.

Author: I'm going to change to "You can think of datagrams as user datagram protocol (UDP) messages...", and keep both plural.

### What's WebTransport?

QuicTransport is one part of the larger [WebTransport proposal](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/). WebTransport is a collection of APIs for sending and receiving data between a web client and a server. QuicTransport is the interface for using the QUIC protocol in the context of bi-directional WebTransport communications.

Chrome is implementing the QuicTransport portion of WebTransport first, before any of the other proposed interfaces. The Chrome team made the decision to start with a QuicTransport after speaking to web developers about their use cases, and we hope to solicit early feedback on the overall WebTransport effort based on developers' experiences with QuicTransport.

### Use cases

This a small list of possible ways developers might use QuicTransport.

> - Sending game state at a regular interval with minimal latency to a server via small, unreliable, out-of-order messages.

Reviewer 2: It occurs to me that you might be using 'reliable' and 'unreliable' in a specific, technical way. Do you need to define these terms some where?

Author: I can link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)

Author: (I added that link to an earlier reference.)

However, if you already have a working WebRTC client/server setup that you're happy with, switching to QuicTransport may not offer many advantages.

## Try it out

The best way to experiment with QuicTransport is to use [this Python code](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/samples/blob/gh-pages/quictransport/quic_transport_server.py) to start up a compatible QUIC server locally. You can then use this page with a [basic JavaScript client](https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/quictransport/client.html) to try out client/server communications.

## Using the API

> QuicTransport was designed on top of modern web platform primitives, like the [Streams API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API). It relies heavily on [promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises), and works well with <code>[async and await](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Async_await)</code>.

Reviewer 2: The 'and' in `async` and `await` should not be monospaced.

writer.write(data1);
writer.write(data2);

// Read datagrams from the server.
const rs = transport.receiveDatagrams();
const reader = rs.getReader();
while (true) {
  const {value, done} = await rs.read();
  if (done) {
    break;
  }
  // value is a Uint8Array.
  console.log(value);
}
```

{% Aside %}
Chrome does not [currently](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=929585) expose an [async iterator](https://github.com/whatwg/streams/issues/778) for a `ReadableStream`. For the time being, using the `getReader()` method combined with a `while()` loop is the best way to read from the stream.
{% endAside %}

### Streams APIs  {: #stream }

Once you've connected to the server, you could also use QuicTransport to send and receive data via its Streams APIs.

Each chunk of all streams is a `Uint8Array`. Unlike with the Datagram APIs, these streams are reliable. But each stream is independent, so data order across streams is not guaranteed.

#### SendStream

A <code>[SendStream](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#sendstream)</code> is created by the web client using <code>createSendStream()</code>, which returns a promise for the <code>SendStream</code>.

> Use the <code>[close()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/close)</code> method of the <code>[WritableStreamDefaultWriter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)</code> associated with the stream to send a [QUIC Stream FIN bit](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.8) to the server. The browser tries to send all pending data before actually closing the associated QUIC stream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the <code>[close()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/close)</code> method of the <code>[WritableStreamDefaultWriter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)</code> instance associated with the stream to send a [QUIC Stream FIN bit](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.8) to the server. The browser tries to send all pending data before actually closing the associated QUIC stream.
```

```js
// Send two Uint8Arrays to the server.
const stream = await transport.createSendStream();
const writer = stream.writable.getWriter();
const data1 = new Uint8Array([65, 66, 67]);
const data2 = new Uint8Array([68, 69, 70]);
writer.write(data1);
writer.write(data2);
try {
  await writer.close();
  console.log('All data has been sent.');
} catch (error) {
  console.error(`An error occurred: ${error}`);
}
```

> Similarly, use the <code>[abort()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/abort)</code> method of the <code>[WritableStreamDefaultWriter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)</code> to send a [QUIC RESET\_STREAM](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.4) to the server. When using <code>abort()</code>, the browser may discard any pending data that hasn't yet been sent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, use the <code>[abort()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/abort)</code> method of the <code>[WritableStreamDefaultWriter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)</code> instance to send a [QUIC RESET\_STREAM](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.4) to the server. When calling <code>abort()</code>, the browser may discard any pending data that hasn't yet been sent.
```

  }
  // value is an instance of ReceiveStream
  await readFrom(value);
}
```

You can detect stream closure using the <code>[closed](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultReader/closed)</code> promise of the <code>[ReadableStreamDefaultReader](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultReader)</code>. When the QUIC stream is [closed with the FIN bit](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.8), the <code>closed</code> promise is fulfilled after all the data is read. When the QUIC stream is closed abruptly (for example, by <code>[STREAM_RESET](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-quic-transport-27#section-19.4)</code>), then the <code>closed</code> promise rejects.

```js
// Assume an active receiveStream
const reader = receiveStream.readable.getReader();
reader.closed.then(() => {
  console.log('The receiveStream closed gracefully.');
}).catch(() => {
  console.error('The receiveStream closed abruptly.');
});
```

#### BidirectionalStream

A <code>[BidirectionalStream](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#bidirectional-stream)</code> might be created either by the server or the client.

> Web clients can create one using `createBidirectionalStream()`, which returns a promise for a `BidirectionalStream`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Web clients can create one using `QuicTransport.createBidirectionalStream()`, which returns a promise for a `BidirectionalStream`.
```

Author: I am not a fan of using the `InterfaceName.methodName()` syntax in examples when `methodName()` is an instance method, rather than a static method.

I think that the reference to `createBidirectionalStream()` is clear enough based on the example code, but if it needs additional clarity, I'd rather switch to the more precise "...the `createBidirectionalStream()` method of a `QuicTransport` instance..."

Reviewer 2: I understand your reasoning. However there are several issues that override. It's been 80-some lines since the last reference to `QuicTransport`. I literally thought, 'what interface is that part of?' This isn't a working piece of code. `QuicTransport. createBidirectionalStream()` is really an identifier or key rather than a function call. Finally, identifying it this way would be more consistent with the way the site has been edited.

Your other option is to work `QuicTransport` into the text somehow to provide some kind of orientation.

Author: I'll go with "the `createBidirectionalStream()` method of a `QuicTransport` instance" in that case.

(If web.dev style is to use `ClassName.methodName()`, that might be an editorial decision to revisit. CC: @kaycebasques)

Author: I've added that language in a few places in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/3104/commits/4b489b8dc19ebb4039b329729ebeec0e3d99714b

```js
const stream = await transport.createBidirectionalStream();
// stream is a BidirectionalStream
// stream.readable is a ReadableStream
// stream.writable is a WritableStream
```

> You can listen for a `BidirectionalStream` created by the server with `receiveBidirectionalStreams()`, which returns a `ReadableStream`. Each chunk of that `ReadableStream`, is, in turn, a `BidirectionalStream`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can listen for a `BidirectionalStream` created by the server with `QuicTransportreceiveBidirectionalStreams()`, which returns a `ReadableStream`. Each chunk of that `ReadableStream`, is, in turn, a `BidirectionalStream`.
```

Author: I don't believe that change would be accurate. It's meant to be `receiveBidirectionalStreams()`.

```js
const rs = transport.receiveBidrectionalStreams();
const reader = rs.getReader();
while (true) {
  const {done, value} = await reader.read();
  if (done) {
    break;
  }
  // value is a BidirectionalStream
  // value.readable is a ReadableStream
  // value.writable is a WritableStream
}
```

A `BidirectionalStream` is just a combination of a `SendStream` and `ReceiveStream`. The examples from the previous two sections explain how to use each of them.

### More examples

> The [WebTransport draft specification](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#quic-transport) includes a number of additional inline examples, along with full documentation for all of the methods and properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [WebTransport draft specification](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#quic-transport) includes a number of additional examples, along with full documentation for all of the methods and properties.
```

## Privacy and security considerations

Please see the [corresponding section](https://wicg.github.io/web-transport/#privacy-security) of the draft specification for authoritative guidance.

## Feedback  {: #feedback }

The Chrome team wants to hear your thoughts and experiences using this API throughout the origin trial process.

### Feedback about the API design

Is there something about the API that's awkward or doesn't work as expected? Or are there missing pieces that you need to implement your idea?

File an issue on the [Web Transport GitHub repo](https://github.com/WICG/web-transport/issues), or add your thoughts to an existing issue.

### Problem with the implementation?

Did you find a bug with Chrome's implementation?

File a bug at [https://new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Include as much detail as you can, along with simple instructions for reproducing.

### Planning to use the API?

Your public support helps Chrome prioritize features, and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support them.

> - Be sure you have signed up for the [origin trial](https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-6744140441987317759) to show your interest and provide your domain and contact info.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Be sure to sign up for the [origin trial](https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-6744140441987317759) to show your interest and provide your domain and contact info.
```
